# Affirm Case Study

## Overview and Origin

* The company I am researching is Affirm. Affirm was founded in 2012 by a group of founders, the most notable being Max Levchin, who was also a co-founder of Pay-Pal. Affirm came about because him and his co-founders saw an opportunity to make retail sales more accessible, and so they sought out a method to bring the power of financing to purchases of all size. They are still a private company but are in very late rounds of funding. The last funding round they raised $500 million through series G funding. Up to date they have raised about $1.5 billion in venture capital and private funding, which has allowed them to jumpstart to where they are today. In November 2020 they did file for an IPO, but since then they have decided to delay their IPO and remain private. Affirm has also previously raised a few million in debt financing as well, although a majority of its capital comes from the equity I previously mentioned. 


## Business Activities:

* In todays world, it is not easy to balance long term financial goals and saving with todays needs and wants. Affirm hopes to make that easier by providing instant low-rate financing for retail purchases, ranging from a few dollars to a few thousand dollars. This can help ease the burden of making large purchases today with cash, as they provide 3, 6, and 12 month financing options for most products. Most of the time they also offer a 0% interest option as well. 

* The way this works is very similar to Paypal or ApplePay, when you are checking out your merchandise on adidas.com for example, you will get an option to "pay with Affirm". Then you will get prompted an option to pay in 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months, with Interest Rates, monthly payments, and total payments clearly listed for each option. This 3rd party payment option technology is nothing new or groundbreaking, but where Affirm has an edge is the fact that they can instantly grant personal loans of any size without any red tape or hidden fees. I think the ease of access and the transparency that Affirm offers is where it gets its advantage. No other company today can issue loans so clearly and so quickly, and that makes Affirm very appealing for customers and businesses. 

* Affirm has partnered with many large ecommerce and retail companies such as Shopify, Adidas, Dicks, BigCommerce, and more. Their ability to make a consumers purchasing decisions easier and more hassle-free has proven effective in growing retail sales. Some of Affirms retail partners have reported as much as an 85% increase in average order value. From a businesses perspective, this technology has the power to not only improve sales, but also improve customer experience and satisfaction, which is something that businesses are constantly seeking. This is why Affirm has the ability to venture out and partner with hundreds of retailers, and continue growing. 

* The primary competitor to Affirm is essentially the entire Credit Card industry. Many years ago, Credit Cards were invented with a very similar purpose as Affirm, to give consumers the ability to finance day-to-day purchases. Were credit cards today lack is the insanely large interest rates they charge and also the many hidden and late fees they charge. You can see how large of a market Credit Cards have been able to create/capture, and that gives us some insight into Affirms potential market size. According to the Central Reserve Bank of Atlanta, about 75% of Americans have at least 1 credit card. Obviously it is hard to say whether or not Affirm can capture the entire Credit Card market, but they are positioned to make quite a large splash in that industry. 

* After doing a deep dive into how Affirm works, I learned that Affirm uses much more than just a FICO credit score to assess a customers credit worthiness. I think that this is becoming a trend in the lending industry with the availability of many new technologies such as *Machine Learning*, and many new customer data points such as online bank statements and social media. Affirm can use **AI** technology, and scrape through many customer data points and give out an accurate interest rate within seconds instead of weeks. As you can see, this powerful technology powering the backend of Affirm, paired with the transparency and ease of access offered on the front-end, Affirm is positioning itself to make a big splash in the Point of Sale lending and retail industry. 


## Landscape:

* I would consider Affirm to operate somewhere between the Payments and Alternative Finance. At first glance you can very easily notice how Affirm is transforming online payments for merchandise. Their web plug-in allows for any third-party website such as Adidas to partner with them, and easily get their payment method installed on their website. Their integration with Shopify has also opened up the door for hundreds of thousands of ecommerce businesses to start easily accepting Affirm as a payment method. The way Affirm payments work are very similar to Paypal, I make an account, and then anytime I want to purchase something I can select "pay with affirm" at checkout. I also want to point out that Affirm also operates in the Alternative Finance domain of FinTech because of their advanced lending technology and capabilities. The fact that they are able to approve personal loans within seconds proves that they have very robust technology working in the background. 

* In terms of Payments, I think that the entire industry has been challenged and stretched this past decade. 10 years ago, the only third party payment company that existed was Paypal. Although PayPal was great for its time, and helped pave the path for easier payment processing, today I would argue that Paypal is not even the best option for payments. Many Americans find themselves using payment methods such as ApplePay and GooglePay very often now, just because it takes 1 tap or 1 click to pay with these newer methods. From the business perspective, the easier and more pain-free a company can make the payment and checkout process, the more sales they will convert. This is simple. When companies started to realize this the past 5-10 years, they were left with no option but to accept alternative payment methods such as ApplePay. Often times consumers find it painstaking to enter in their entire Credit Card number, expiration date, and security code. Now moving onto personal lending, I think that the industry is just now starting to begin to see massive changes. Many new start-up companies such as Avant and SoFi are entering the market and making a big splash due to their ability to better estimate a customers credit worthiness, and give direct and cheaper quotes almost instantly. Traditionally, personal loans ran insanely high interest rates, and were at times nearly impossible to acquire, but this is dramatically shifting now. I mentioned many competitors in each of the two domains, but Affirm gains an advantage over any of those companies because of its ability to thrive at the top of both of those domains, creating synergies in the realms of Customer Experience, Overhead Cost Reduction, and more. The only competitors that rival Affirms grasp on both domains are Afterpay and Klarna, who are both also very new startups. I believe it will be very interesting to see which one of these three comes out on top in the next few years. 



## Results

* I think this company has really elevated commerce from both the customer perspective and business perspective. As a consumer, I can see how a company like Affirm can provide me value. I know many people who struggle with being able to pay for everyday items, or pay for special items, and a company like this can surely help. I can imagine how much something like this can help consumers during the holiday season, where millions of Americans are low on cash, but still want to make their loved ones happy. Instead of having to wait until their next paycheck, which can be up to 2 weeks away, customers can still purchase the items they need without paying any extra fees. Obviously this is just a micro-example of how Affirm adds value to everyday life, but I will let you imagine the thousands of opportunities a product like this can open up for everyday consumers. I have seen the Affirm badge on various websites that I shop on regularly, which goes to show how their product is starting to be accepted throughout the internet. Now looking from a business perspective, Affirms ability to safely boost sales is unmatched. As I have mentioned before, the ease at which a customer can "buy now" and "pay later" brings in many sales that traditionally would have been lost. 

* I think the primary metric that Affirm and its investors use to track growth and success is revenue growth. As with any growth stage company, the bottom line profit may not be the best indicator of success, because at this stage the company is not worried about making money so much as getting users and sales. This is why I think revenue is a better indicator of success. If you look at Affirms revenue, it has grown dramatically over the last few years. In the last reported year, Affirms revenue has nearly doubled, reaching over $500 million. Obviously this is great news for any early stage company as it shows that more people are using its product/service. One thing to be wary of though is that a very large chunk of that revenue came from a single partner website, Peleton. Although this isn't terrible, it does add some risk. I think that Affirm is positioned well to keep increasing revenue, as the pandemic has led to a mass adoption of ecommerce.

* Klarna is the biggest competitor that Affirm has currently, clocking in yearly revenue of over $700 million. This is mainly due to the fact that Klarna is currently global, with massive efforts in Germany and Sweden, countries that Affirm has barely even touched so far. Considering the fact that Klarna has also been around for longer than Affirm, and also is growing revenue at a slower pace, I think Affirm can surpass Klarna in a matter of a few years. I think another great metric to look at is User Growth since these are both relatively young tech companies. Affirm has about 4.5 million users while Klarna only has about 3.5 million. Both companies have several avenues for growth, and it will be interesting to see if one takes over this space, or if there is space in the market for 2/3 companies to co-exist. 


## Recommendations

* I think that Affirm so far has executed perfectly on its major growth drivers, and I believe that it can continue to grow as it has been over the past decade. With that being said, I believe there is two ways that Affirm can elevate its product, and leave the competition in the dust:
    1) Affirm Credit Card - I think that affirm can expand its abilities to give consumers a "buy now pay later" experience by offering a credit card that can be used anywhere, including brick and mortar establishments. Obviously Affirm would have to beef up its strategy and its credit underwriting process, but if they are able to pull this off, they could expand into the multi-trillion dollar credit card business. We all know how crazy the credit card industry currently is, with crazy APR's, hidden fees, and red tape. If Affirm can manage to reduce all of this like they have in their online model, they could start taking serious market share from Visa, Mastercard, Amex, and more. I think they could implement their already existing AI technology to their credit card business sector, making their transition almost seamless. (Update: I did find some content on how Affirm is already testing and slowly rolling out a card model. Very interesting to see)
    2) International Growth - I believe Affirm has been marketing its services mainly to the US market, but if it is able to focus on international growth, it could see tremendous revenue and user growth. Obviously this comes with tons of compliance and regulation struggles, but besides that, their product could plug right into many international e-markets.


## References

* Affirm's Website - https://www.affirm.com/business/solutions

* CreditCards.com Website - https://www.creditcards.com/credit-card-news/ownership-statistics/#:~:text=Using%20the%20U.S.%20Census%20Bureau,a%20charge%20card%20or%20both.

* CrunchBase - https://www.crunchbase.com/search/funding_rounds/field/organizations/last_funding_type/affirm

* Wikipedia - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Affirm_(company)

* GRWTH.com - https://www.pymnts.com/earnings/2021/affirm-hits-4-5m-users-shoots-for-everyday-payment-expansion/